<!-- TITLE: Glossary -->
<!-- SUBTITLE: A general glossary of common terms used within the company -->

# Law Enforcement
## CJIS
An acronym, pronounced "see jiss", which stands for [Criminal Justice Information Services](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Crime_Information_Center).  It is a division of the FBI.  Their purpose is collect data about crimes in the united states and provide access to that data, and the statistics generated from them, to law enforcement agencies.  Due to the sensitive nature of the data that they collect, they have created strict rules related to who can access that data and under what conditions.  Law enforcement agencies must pass periodic CJIS compliance testing to ensure that the policies, practices, and technologies of the agencies conform to the CJIS-defined standards.  CJIS runs the [NCIC](#ncic) system.  If agencies are not compliant with the CJIS rules, they may lose access to NCIC and they may even face criminal prosecution. 

## Clery Reporting
A national crime reporting system which is only applicable to the on-campus police departments of colleges and universities.  College police departments are, like other departments, required to report crime data to the state, via UCR or IBR, but Clery is an additional, more detailed reporting of crime data which is sent directly to the US Department of Education.  It was instituted and required by the [Clery Act](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clery_Act), which was named after Jeanne Clery, a student who was tragically raped and murdered.  It was discovered that colleges often chose to handle criminal incidents (especially rape, alcohol, and drug crimes) via school-administered punishments (i.e. the dean's office) rather than via the criminal justice system (i.e. the police department).  As it turns out, not only do parents not want to send their students to colleges with high crime rates due safety concerns,  they also don't want their children to graduate with a criminal record.  Since such crimes were being deferred to the dean's office, they were effectively being swept under the rug by not reporting them to the state and the FBI.  To remedy this, rather than requiring them to accurately report their crimes through the existing systems, they added a new reporting system.  Once per year, colleges must send a paper report summarizing all their "real" crime statistics to the Department of Education.

## IBR
An initialism which stands for Incident Based Reporting.  This is a general term used to describe any or all of the NIBRS-compatible state-level repositories and specifications (whereas [NIBRS](#nibrs) more specifically refers to the national repository and specifications managed by the FBI).  In Virginia, this initialism is often used interchangeably with the term "Incident Report" (e.g. "I wrote an IBR").  

## IOR
An initialism which stands for Incident/Offense Report.  This initialism is used, in some states (especially Ohio and Illinois), interchangeably with the term "Incident Report" (e.g. "I wrote an IOR").  In the legacy software, incidents were regularly referred to as IORs (because it was first written for Ohio), but in the .NET rewrite of RMS, we are using the more universal term "Incident Report", instead.

## NCIC
An initialism which stands for [National Crime Information Center](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Crime_Information_Center).  It is a national database and computer network system, run by CJIS, a department of the FBI.  It interconnects all the law-enforcement agencies in the US and provides them with the ability to enter and query crime-related records.  Its records are, by no means, as extensive or detailed as those kept by each department in their respective RMS systems, but it stores useful information such as wanted persons, convicted violent criminals, sex offenders, gangs, and stolen property.  Each state has their own NCIC-compatible system and NCIC ties them all together.  However, each state calls their system by a different name, which can lead to confusion (e.g. OH & IL = LEADS, MI = LEIN, VA = VCIN).  In order to facilitate interstate communication, the FBI has defined sets of NCIC standard codes which all states use when storing data in their respective systems (e.g. NCIC codes for races, ethnicities, hair colors, eye cloros, states and provinces).

## NIBRS
An acronym, pronounced "nigh burrs", which stands for [National Incident Based Reporting System](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Incident-Based_Reporting_System).  NIBRS is a national repository of crime data which is run by the FBI.  It was designed as a replacement for [UCR](#ucr).  While UCR simply transmitted summary statistics (e.g. 1 murder and 12 assaults in the month of January), NIBRS is incident-based.  That means that it sends a summary of each and every incident to the central repository so that more detailed analysis can be performed.    For instance, with UCR, you might know how many assaults there were, and how many total juvenile victims there were, in a given month, but you'd have no idea how many of the assaults had juvenile victims, or which of the other stats were related to those specific incidents.  NIBRS solved that problem and makes those kinds of analyses possible.   IBR was developed in 1988, after most departments had computers, so, whereas UCR data was submitted on paper, data is submitted NIBRS electronically.  The FBI publishes specifications for the exact format in which the data must be submitted, along with validation rules and guidelines for how the incident data must be collected, categorized, and entered.

IBR is backwards compatible with UCR.  All UCR statistics can be extrapolated from the IBR data.  As such, some of the standard codes used in reporting to NIBRS are the same ones that were used in UCR.  For instance, one of the most important fields in NIBRS is the offense category.  This field is submitted to the FBI using a standard list of codes (e.g. 13A = Aggrivated Assualt, 09A = Murder).  The name for that field, in the NIBRS specification, is the UCR Offense Code.

Not all states chose to comply with NIBRS.  Some states chose to stay with UCR and continue to do so.  Of the states which did adopt NIBRS, they each run their own NIBRS-compliant repository to collect the data from all the departments in their state.  The states then re-submit all of their data in one batch to the national repository run by the FBI.  Each state may have additional data that they want to track, so they often will alter the NIBRS specifications within their state, to cater to their needs.  So, when the departments within their state submit NIBRS data, they must do so using the format and rules specified by their state.  The state collects all that state-specific data in their repository and then reformats it, as necessary, to comply with the national specifications, before resubmitting it to the FBI.  Since the specifications are different in each state, the term NIBRS typically referrs specifically to the FBI-run repository, and their national specifications, whereas the term [IBR](#ibr) is used more loosely to refer to the system as a whole.

## UCR
An initialism which stands for [Uniform Crime Reporting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Crime_Reports).  UCR is the paper-based crime-statistics reporting system which predated [NIBRS](#nibrs).  Some states still currently use UCR to report their crime statistics to the FBI because they have yet to become NIBRS compliant.  Since NIBRS is backwards compatible with UCR, UCR statistics can be generated from any NIBRS-compliant state's data, and then that can be combined with the UCR data from the non-NIBRS states to get nation-wide crime statistics. 

# Public Safety
## CAD
An acronym which stands for [Computer-Aided Dispatch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer-aided_dispatch).  CAD is an application which is used by dispatch centers (i.e. 9-1-1 call centers) to record the details about the incoming [calls](#call-for-service-cfs), recommend the best units to respond to each call, and track the status and times of the units as the respond to the calls.  CAD software typically integrates with phone, alarm, and radio equipment, as well as with mapping, [MDT](#mdt), [RMS](#rms), and [emergency dispatch](#emergency-dispatch-emd) software.  The term CAD is used interchangeably with the term "Dispatch Software".  

## Call for Service (CFS)
In simple terms, a CFS is a record of a 9-1-1 call, as it was received by a dispatch center.  The CFS is the main entity/data-type of CAD systems.  In reality, though, what exactly a CFS is, is murky.  For instance, the following things would call be recorded in CAD as CFSs too:
* A standard, non-emergency phone call
* Someone walking-in to the department and reporting a problem at the front desk
* A police officer sees something suspicious an decides, on his own, to check it out
* A traffic stop, even if only to give a warning
Many departments will even record CFSs for non-requests which require no response.  For instance, if they get a call asking when the parade is going to be, they'll record a CFS for it.  Some departments also record CFSs for things like an officer being on construction detail.  Since their CFS statistics are used to prove how busy they are, they may even go so far as to record wrong-number calls as CFSs.  So, more accurately, a CFS is a record of any event which occupies either the time of either a call-taker, a dispatcher, an the officer.

The term "Call" is often used interchageably to refer to a CFS (e.g. "I dispatched her to the shoplifting call", "I closed the call", "She's on a self-initiated call").

To complicate matters, at IDN, we use CFS to mean something very specific.  So, at IDN, CFS and Call are not really used interchangeably, even though everyone else in the industry does.  For IDN, a CFS is a police department's own copy of the call data, as recorded in their [RMS](#rms) application, whereas a call is the dispatch center's original record, as recorded in the CAD system.  The CFS record in our RMS is a less detailed record than the call in the CAD system.  To further complicate matters, our CAD system uses the term "Event", in most cases, rather than the term "Call".  Sometimes it uses the two terms interchangeably.

## Emergency Dispatch (EMD)
A system which provides Q&A (i.e. decision-tree) call scripts for dispatchers to follow when they are on the phone with someone during an emergency situtation.  Originally, these systems were flip-card based, but now they are almost always software-based systems.  The system tells the dispatchers what to say and do, each step of the way, depending on the responses they get from the caller.  Not only does the system reduce anxiety, but it also provides a "determinant code" for each incident, which directs the dispatchers on what kinds of units will be needed and how critical their response times will be.  

Dispatchers must be specially trained and certified to used the system, so not all dispatchers, or even, in some cases, dispatch centers, can provide emergency-dispatch services.  Traditionally, only medical emergencies were handled via emergency dispatch systems, but now police and fire emergencies may be handled by them as well (depending which system is being used, different training and certifications may be required for each).  Since medical emergencies are still the primary use for emergency dispatch systems, they are often referred to using the initialism EMD, which stands for [Emergency Medical Dispatch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emergency_medical_dispatch).

Emergency dispatch systems, and the training and certification which go along with them, are provided by private vendors.  For instance, Priorty Dispatch, PowerPhone, and APCO are popular vendors of emergency dispatch systems.  In addition to providing the software, materials, and training on their systems, the vendors often provide legal protection for their customers, provided their protocols were being followed properly.  [CAD](#cad) applications will often integrate with the emergency dispatch system to send it the call data, to receive any notes collected about the incident, and to receive and respond appropriately to its determinant code.

## MDT
An initialism which stands for [Mobile Data Terminal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mobile_data_terminal).  An MDT is a device, and the software running on it, which provides the ability to for a unit to be dispatched electronically dispatching (as opposed to dispatching by voice over radio).  In other words, it's an application, usually running on a ruggadized laptop bolted to a vehicle's console, which receives notifications from a CAD system.  The MDT software will show the user when their unit is dispatched, it will show them information about the [call](#call-for-service-cfs) to which they have been dispatched, and it provides the ability to notify the CAD system when they go enroute, or change their status in any other way.  Some common, more advanced, MDT features are: running state queries (i.e. NCIC), self-initiating calls, adding details to calls, instant messaging, mapping, and field-reporting.  The less specific term "Mobile" is often used interchangeably with the term MDT.

## RMS
An initialism which stands for Records Management System.  It is a software application used for electronically storing and organizing all the records kept by a department.  While this term can sometimes be used for other types of records (e.g. Fire RMS, Medical RMS), it is most commonly used to refer to police records.  Historically, police departments had a records room, where they stored all their records in file cabinets.  The records room was maintained by records clerks.  Now, records are all digital, stored in an RMS, but there are still records clerks/officers who are responsible for overseeing them.  Police RMSs store incident reports, warrants, arrests, crash reports, citations.  They provide data analysis, reporting, and electronic-submissions (e.g. [UCR](#ucr), [IBR](#ibr), e-Citations).  Other common features of RMSs are: master-names database, property-room inventory, parking tickets, warnings, investigations, and case management.  The term "Records" is often used interchangeably with the term RMS.

## JMS
An initialism which stands for Jail Management System.  It is a software application used to manage all aspects of running a jail.  Note that jails and prisons are different things.  Jails are temporary holding facilities for suspects, while they are being tried in court.  If convicted, they would then be sent to a prison.  JMSs, therefore, are designed to track the process through the court system of their various inmates.  They contain modules for tracking inmates, cells, visitors, and intra-jail criminal incidents.  

# Development
## Flotsam
## Folio
## Poncho
## Puffin
